# A Cautionary Tale

 - published: 2014-11-29 11:30
 - tags: education, lessons

With this post I would like to take you back to a time some years ago.

At the time I wasn't desperate for more projects. I was doing quite well, enjoying my business' success (albeit on a small scale) before I made the biggest mistake of my business career.

The clients' credentials seemed to check out. They appeared to be a Successful Overseas Furniture Company. From early talks they were prepared to pay good money for good work. I could leave the task in the hands of my trusty foreign project manager and team. Personally, I would need to invest very little time in the project.

Sounds like a winning formula to me……Get the deal done and wipe my hands of it to let the experts finish the job!!!

I figured it was no big deal if I didn't ask for an upfront payment in this instance, they seemed trustworthy and after all…….What could go wrong? My team is brilliant with over 80 years combined experience in the IT world. It really seemed like a no brainer. Let's do this!

Everything started well, the client was demanding of my project manager, but nothing he couldn't handle. I would fondly describe him as a ‘nice guy but a pain in the ass.'

And then it came time for the first payment. Of course, this should go through reasonably quickly. I was so reasonable and hadn't even asked for an upfront payment!

Well…….the client started complaining about small details here and there that weren't exactly as he wanted. I explained we could change some things around but it was obvious that we had done considerable work. I had paid my team upfront fees and I now needed some money coming in. It was a large job so I had considerable expenses at this stage but no income to date.

Nevertheless, after about 2 weeks of pain the money eventually came through…..

Perhaps at this stage I should have seen some warning signs. The internal politics at this company were incredibly unsettling (I received all the Spaghetti emails with internal discussions). They had no clear consensus on what they wanted, they were a little shady when it came to payments and my team were getting agitated at the client for the constant mood changes.

But my team trusted me and I told them to continue on with the project, I felt obligated to, and I still felt it would work out.

This is when things started to turn sour, unreasonable requests started coming in left, right and centre. So much so that my own team began to bicker for the first time. (I had never seen this before)

When we delivered the final product we found that it was appreciated by a couple of people at the other end, but a couple of others thought it needed changes. It was a website that we were delivering, but it was amazing how little knowledge the older members of their team understood. (Eg. One of them was complaining it didn't work in IE6)

The weeks went on and I had to pay my team but I wasn't getting paid due to all the politics at the clients end. I agreed to even do a bit more work just to satisfy everyone and in the hope that this would trigger the payment.

But pay day never came :(

Now the client started blaming cash flow problems from the site on me, they had ignored our advice the entire time thinking they knew better and when they got what they wanted, they couldn't understand why it wasn't converting. So, so very painful……

Soon after, the client said they would be able to pay a % of each sale to me. WHAT?? That wasn't part of the agreement, I was supposed to deliver a site that they wanted and get paid for the work. There was no commission based agreement.

Soon after, they claimed they didn't have the funds to pay me. How could someone commission a job they couldn't pay for? Regardless, my questions weren't getting any results. This wasn't resulting in money being transferred to my bank account.

Pay day never came again. They still gave me empty promises 6 months later and dragged me into their personal problems about why they couldn't pay. It was a mess.

I was left in a bad financial position because of this client.

But instead of blaming the client, a true entrepreneur will analyse his own actions and back-track to where he/she made a decision within his/her control to end up in the disappointing situation that eventuated.

My mistake was saying yes to the project. I blame me for my position and this empowers me to do better next time. It was a very expensive lesson and one I took months to recover from, however, so long as I continued to learn I knew it would be all worthwhile.

Lessons learned:

– Listen to the warning signs.

– Trust your gut, don't be seduced by potential profits that end up losing you money and time in the long run.

– Put your foot down when necessary, you have entered into an agreement, not a ‘I will pay when I am happy arrangement.' Regardless of what society says, you are not a Slave to your Clients!

– If the client won't pay something upfront, be suspicious.

– Be prepared to say NO if something doesn't feel right.

And Never Forget The Golden Rule: Recognising and Avoiding Incompatible Clients Is As Important As Recognising and Working With Compatible Clients.
