# Embracing Autonomy

 - published: 2014-09-21 12:22
 - tags: autonomy, systems

Let me tell you a story:

I have an App Development arm to my business. Most of the developers I contract to complete such work are remote.

For context; Some of these workers are from England, some from America, some from the Ukraine, some from the Philippines, some from India and others from Pakistan.

Some years ago I had an English client who I was contracted to make a website for.

My Communication SYSTEM at the time went something like this;

English client says something to me, I forward this to the Project Manager in England (how stupid), he forwards it to the developers in Pakistan, then it has to come all the way up the chain again before it gets to the client.

That was 6 EMAILS over multiple timezones just to get a simple answer back to the client every time he wanted to know something! Extremely time consuming and costly.

There were too many chinks in the chain and it was unnecessarily complicated. It could fail or be delayed at any one communication phase which would translate to even more delays to client responses. Unprofessional and horribly ineffective.

If only I could remove myself as a Bottleneck from the equation? Of course, I could do this, BUT....I was scared. I didn’t want the Project Manager to ask the client how much he was paying me otherwise he would then know I was making a huge profit. Luckily for my uneducated self, I didn’t have a choice. This wasn’t sustainable.

So I took the risk. I put the Project Manager in touch with the client directly.

Low and behold, the client actually thanked me and everyone was instantly happier. The message didn’t have to come through Australia TWICE for an answer anymore. Now it took 4 EMAILS over 2 Timezones rather than 6 EMAILS over 3 Timezones to get a technical response.

The SYSTEM became: Client talks to Project Manager, Project Manager talks to Developers, then the message goes back again. Much faster and much easier on everyone. Not only that, BUT I GOT TO DO LESS LOW LEVERAGE WORK AND FOCUS ON ACQUIRING MORE CLIENTS. Sometimes less really is more.

I also noted that the Project Manager did a BETTER job at this point as he enjoyed the extra responsibility and trust.

But this was just to be the tip of the iceberg. I began to notice other areas of my business that I could remove myself from.

For example; The quoting process was tedious because I knew nothing about software. I thought I could take my system to the next level and devised a model that removed me from this process as well.

I told my Project Manager that he gets x% of the project fee, the company takes y%, the developers take z% and that 5% can be allocated to his budget for the project. (This covers risks and if he needs to contract in a little extra help)

Again it was pretty scary considering my Project Manager would know the exact financials. Not to mention I was doing about 1% of the work he was doing. The workings of the business would be so much more open.

Interestingly enough, the extra responsibility was a welcome change for my Project Manager and the system ran BETTER because I wasn’t UNNECESSARILY INVOLVED. This left people more skilled than myself to fulfil client needs. I don’t know what the Project Manager spends the budget on most of the time, and to be honest, I don’t really care. He knows our Business Objectives, I trust him and because I let him into the inner workings of the Business he has taken on more responsibility and gone from strength to strength. Business people understand that businesses have to profit. I think it is time we realised we are all in this together.

As Business Owner I know my role is to be the Chess Player and not the Chess Piece. I save tons of time to focus on more important tasks because of simple systems I have implemented. While this is an emotionally hard concept to embrace at first, it is incredibly effective. Growth for my business became so much easier when I removed myself as a bottle neck. I also found myself to be happier as I focused on tasks that I enjoy.

As I write this post it is 2014. I think it is time to say goodbye to the days of Micro Managing Bosses and Constant Approval.

I encourage other business owners to embrace Autonomy before you get left behind.

“Perfection is not when there is no more to add, but no more to take away.” – Antoine De Saint-Exupery
