# How Formal Education Hurts The Entrepreneur

 - published: 2015-01-15 00:01
 - tags: education,

How Formal Education Hurts The Entrepreneur

The following is a discussion about Formal Education, don’t expect it to be pretty ;)

We all remember school. We did tests and exams, we received marks, we had the “cool kids”, we had the “not so cool” kids, we were ranked against each other and failure was stigmatised.

When test results were handed back, the whole class would compare. Avoid that “F” grade at all costs or be prepared to face the social stigma and ridicule that goes with it. Apparently it MATTERS that Steve got an ‘A’ on that Algebra test and you only got a ‘C’. He is better than you, you suck and don’t ever forget it.

However, I will let you in on a little secret. You could be great at any of the subjects taught in school if you CARED enough. The human brain has an amazing ability to develop many skill sets, however you were told that you were either “Good” or “Bad” at something and anything contradicting that was only propagated by those Artsy lunatics. Remember that you were bad at EVERYTHING before you were good at it (including walking).

This might trigger the “Well you obviously didn’t do well in school” response………….Well, actually I did. I was judged by the relevant authorities to be in the top 4 percentile in my state upon completing school and went on to obtain a Bachelor Of Pharmacy. An “esteemed” degree, if you will.

Armed with what some may think of as a handy resume; from my perspective, School and University had failed me.

For the entrepreneur, formal education breeds a terrible mentality. Good luck with succeeding in the business world by avoiding a Real World “F” at all costs. Rather than looking at every experience as a pass or failure, I believe we should realign our thoughts to view EVERY experience as an opportunity to learn. You will never be perfect at anything, but you can always strive to get closer. That 100% you received in school is an illusion.

Comparing yourself to others has little practical output. Trying to improve on your past efforts however, has amazing benefits. You are not an A, B, C, D or F. Simply improve and take the lessons from your experiences. You won’t get through the first week in business if you expect everything to run smoothly and to get “A’s” like you did all through school. It won’t happen.

The reality is that for a business to thrive it must risk failure and scrutiny. In fact, your business WILL receive scrutiny, I guarantee it. Even if only the minority are unhappy with you, they will be LOUD. Accept this and realise that when any Company introduces a product/service to the world, some people may find it useful, a lot won’t. Your 100% grades in school are an illusion. Perfection doesn’t exist in the real world.

The mindset has to shift from “If I just study hard enough I will receive an A” to “I will constantly try new things in business, some of the skill sets I may be strong with immediately, but most will take targeted practice, mistakes or even delegation (God forbid).

So forget the classes in school that you were good at but don’t matter in the business world (Your client doesn’t care that you are a Stoichiometry ninja). Instead, focus on the skills that will actually matter. You will get it wrong, you will make mistakes, at times it will be hard. Suck it up and move on. Overpreparing (Read exam preparation) will not help you get real world results, experience and practical improvement will.

Action beats study, Period.
